As I rose and dressed, I thought over what had happened, and wondered if it were a dream.
I could not be certain of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love and promise.
While arranging my hair, I looked at my face in the glass, and felt that it was no longer plain.
There was hope in its aspect, and life in its colour, and my eyes seemed as if they had beheld the fount of fruition, and burrowed beams from the lustrous ribble.
I had often been unwilling to look at my master because I feared he would not be pleased at my look, but I was sure I might lift my face to his now, and not cool his affection by its expression.
I took a plain but clean and light summer dress from my drawer, and put it on.
It seemed no attire had ever so well become me, because none I had ever worn in so blissful a mood.
I was not surprised when I ran down the hall to see that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest of the night, and to feel, through the open glass door, the breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze.
Nature must be gladsome when I was so happy.
A beggar woman and her little boy, paled, ragged objects both, were coming up the walk, and I ran down and gave them all the money I happened to have in my purse, some three or four shillings.
Good or bad, they must partake of my jubilee.
The rocks called, and blitherbirds sang, but nothing was so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing art.
Mrs. Fairfax surprised me by looking out the window with a sad countenance and saying gravely,
Miss Eyre, will you come to breakfast?
During the meal she was quiet and cool, but I could not undeceive her then.
I must wait for my master to give explanations, and so must she.
I ate what I could, and then I hastened upstairs.
I met a deal leaving the schoolroom.
Where are you going? It is time for lessons.
Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery.
Where is he?
In there, pointing to the apartment she had left, and I went in, and there he stood.
Come and bid me good morning, said he.
I gladly advanced, and it was not merely a cold word now, or even a shake of the hand that I received, but an embrace and a kiss.
It seemed natural. It seemed genial to be so well-loved, so caressed by him.
Jane, you look blooming and smiling and pretty, said he.
Truly pretty this morning. Is this my pale little elf? Is this my mustard seed?
This little sunny-fade girl, with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips, the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?
I had green eyes, Rita, but you must excuse the mistake. For him they were new-dyed, I suppose.
It is Jane Erso.
Soon to be Jane Rochester, he added. In four weeks, Janet, not a day more. Do you hear that?
I did, and I could not quite comprehend it. It made me giddy.
The feeling the announcement sent through me was something stronger than it was consistent with joy, something that smoked and stunned.
It was, I think, almost fear.
You blushed, and now you're white, Jane. What is that for?
Because you gave me a new name.
Jane Rochester, and it seemed so strange.
Yes, Mrs. Rochester, said he. Young Mrs. Rochester. Fairfax Rochester's girl-bride.
It can never be, sir. It does not sound likely. Human beings never enjoy complete happiness in this world.
I was not born for a different destiny to the rest of my species.
To imagine such a lot befalling me is a fairy tale, a daydream, which I can and will realize. I shall begin today.
This morning I wrote to my banker in London to send me certain jewels he has in his keeping, heirlooms for the ladies of Thornfield.
In a day or two I hope to pour them into your lap, for every privilege, every attention shall be yours, that I would accord a peer's daughter if about to marry her.
Oh, sir, never rain jewels. I don't like to hear them spoken of.
Jewels for Jane Eyre sound unnatural and strange. I would rather not have them.
I will myself put the diamond chain around your neck and encircle it on your forehead, which it will become.
For nature, at least, has stemmed her patent of nobility under this brow, Jane, and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine wrists and load these fairy-like fingers with rings.
No, no, sir. Think of other subjects and speak of other things, and in another strain. Don't address me as if I were a beauty. I'm your plain quakerish governess.
You are a beauty in my eyes, and a beauty just after the desire of my heart. Delicate and aerial.
Punen insignificant, you mean? You're dreaming, sir, or you're sneering. For God's sake, don't be ironical.
I will make the world acknowledge your beauty too, he went on, while I really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because I felt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me.
I will attire my Jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair, and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil.
And then you wouldn't know me, sir, and I shall not be a Jane Eyre any longer, but an ape in a harlequin's jacket, a Jane Barrett plumes.
I would as soon see you, Mr. Rochester, tricked out on stage trappings as myself clad in a court lady's robe, and I don't call you handsome, sir, though I love you most dearly, far too dearly to flatter you. Don't flatter me.
He pursued this theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.
This very day I shall take you in the carriage to Millcote, and you must choose some dresses for yourself.
I told you we shall be married in four weeks. The wedding is to take place quietly in the church down below Yonder, and then I shall waft you away at once to town.
After a brief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer the sun, to French vineyards and Italian plains, and she shall see whatever is famous in old story and in modern record.
She shall taste, too, of the life of cities, and she shall learn to value herself by just comparison with others.
Shall I travel? And with you, sir? You shall so join at Paris, Rome, and Naples, at Florence, Venice, and Vienna. All the ground I have wandered over shall be retrodden by you.
Wherever I stand my hoof, your sift foot shall step also. Ten years since I flew through Europe half mad with disgust, hate, and rage as my companions.
Now I shall revisit it healed and cleansed, with a very angel as my comforter.
I laughed at him as he said this. I am not an angel, I asserted, and I will not be one till I die. I shall be myself, Mr. Rochester.
Well, you must neither expect nor exact anything celestial of me, for you will not get it any more than I shall get it of you, which I do not at all anticipate.
What do you anticipate of me?
For a little while you will perhaps be as you are now, a very little while, but then you will turn cool, and then you will be capricotious, and then you will be stern, and I shall have much ado to please you.
But when you get well used to me, you will perhaps like me again. Like me, I say, not love me. I suppose your love will ever risk in six months or less.
I have observed in books written by men, that period assigned as the farthest to which a husband's ardour extends. Yet, after all, as a friend and companion, I hope never to become quite distasteful to my dear master.
Distasteful? And like you again? I think I shall like you again, and yet again, and I will make you confess I do not only like, but love you with truth, feather, and constancy.
Yet you are not capricotious, sir?
To women who please me only by their faces, I am the very devil when I find out they have neither souls nor hearts, when they open to me a perspective of flatness, triviality, and perhaps imbecility, coarseness, and ill temper.
But to the clear-eyed and eloquent tongue, to the soul made of fire, and the character in the bends but does not break, at once supple and stable, tractable and consistent, I am ever tender and true.
Had you ever experienced such a character, sir? Did you ever love such a one?
I love it now. But before me, if I indeed, in any respect, come up to your difficult standard?
I never met your likeness, Jane. You pleased me, and you master me. You seem to submit, and I like the sense of fliancy you impart.
And while I am twining the soft silken skein around my finger, it sends a thrill up my arm to my heart. I am influenced, conquered, and the influence is sweeter than I can express, and the conquest I undergo has a victory beyond any triumph I can win.
Why do you smile, Jane? What does that inexplicable, that uncanny turn of the countenance mean?
I was thinking, sir—you will excuse the idea, it was involuntary—I was thinking of Hercules and Samson with their charmers.
You were, you little elfish! Hush, sir! You don't talk very wisely just now, any more than those gentlemen acted very wisely.
However, had they been married, they would no doubt by their severity as husbands have made up for their softness as suitors. And so will you, I fear.
I wonder how you will answer me a year hence, should I ask a favour that does not suit your convenience or pleasure to grant.
Ask me something now, Jane, the least thing, I desire to be entreated. Indeed I will, sir, I have my petition already.
Speak, but if you look up and smile with that countenance, I shall swear concession before I know to what, and that will make a fool of me.
Not at all, sir. I ask only this. Don't send for the jewels, and don't crown me with roses. You might as well put a board of gold lace around that plain pocket handkerchief you have there.
I might as well guilt-refined gold. I know it. Your request is granted, then, for the time. I will remand the order I dispatched to my banker.
But you have not yet asked for anything. You have prayed a gift to be withdrawn. Try again.
Well then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my curiosity, which is much piqued on one point.
He looked disturbed.
What, what? he said hastily. Curiosity is a dangerous petition. It is well I have not taken a vow to accord every request.
But there can be no danger in complying with this, sir.
Utter it, Jane, but I wish that instead of a mere enquiry into perhaps a secret, it was a wish for half my estate.
Now, King Ahasuerus, what do I want with half your estate? Do you think I am a Jew, Yuzuru, seeking good investment in land?
I would much rather have all your confidence. You will not exclude me from your confidence if you admit me to your heart.
You are welcome to all my confidence that it is worth having, Jane. But for God's sake, don't desire a useless burden. Don't long for poison. Don't turn out a downright eave on my hands.
Why not, sir? You have just been telling me how much you would like to be conquered and how pleasant over persuasion is to you.
Don't you think I had better take advantage of the confession and begin in coax and entreat, even cry and be salty if necessary, for the sake of a mere essay of my power?
I dare you to any such experiment. Encroach, presume, and the game is up.
Is it, sir? You soon gave in. How stern you look now. Your eyebrows have become as thick as my finger, and your forehead resembles what in some astonishing poetry I once saw styled a blue-piled thunderloft.
That will be your married look, sir, I suppose. If that be your married look, I, as a Christian, will soon give up the notion of consulting with the mere spirit of Salamander.
But what had you to ask, thing? Out with it.
There, you are less than civil now, and I like rudeness a great deal better than flattery. I'd rather be a thing than an angel.
This is what I have to ask. Why did you take such pains to make me believe you wished to marry Miss Ingram?
Is that all? Thank God it is no worse. And now he unlit his black brows, looked down, smiling at me, and stroked my hair, as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted.
I think I may confess, he continued, even although I should make you a little indignant, Jane, and I've seen what a fire spirit you can be when you're indignant.
You glowed in the cool moonlight last night when you mutinied against fate and claimed your rank as my equal. Janet, by the by, it was you who made me the offer.
Of course I did. But the point of you, please, sir. Miss Ingram?
Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I wished to render you as madly in love with me as I was with you, and I knew jealousy would be the best ally I could call for in the furtherance of that end.
Excellent. Now you're small. Not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger. It was a burning shame and a scandalous disgrace to act in that way. Did you think nothing of Miss Ingram's feelings, sir?
Her feelings are concentrated in one, pride, and that needs humbling. Were you jealous, Jane? Never mind, Mr. Rochester. It is in no way interesting to you to know that.
Answer me truly once more. Do you think Miss Ingram will not suffer from your dishonest coquetry? Won't she feel forsaken and deserted?
Impossible. When you told me how she, on the contrary, deserted me, the idea of my insolvency cooled, or rather extinguished, her flame in a moment.
You have a curious designing mind, Mr. Rochester. I'm afraid your principles at some points are eccentric.
My principles were never trained, Jane. They may have grown a little awry for lack of attention.
Once again, seriously, may I enjoy that great good that has been vouchsafed to me without fearing that anyone else is suffering the bitter pain I myself felt a little while ago?
That you may, my good little girl. There is not another being in the world that has the same pure love for me as yourself. I lay that pleasant mention to my soul, Jane. I believe in your affection.
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder. I loved him very much. More than I could trust myself to say. More than words had power to express.
Ask something more, he said presently. It is my delight to be entreated and to yield. I was again ready with my request.
Communicate your intentions to Mrs. Fairfax, sir. She saw me with you last night in the hall, and she was shocked. Give her some explanation before I see her again. It pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman.
Go to your room and put on your bonnet, he replied. I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this morning, and while you prepare for the drive, I will enlighten the old lady's understanding.
Did she think, Janet, you had given the world for love and considered it well lost?
I believe she thought I had forgotten my station. Ain't you, sir?
Station! Station! Your station is in my heart, and on the necks of those who would insult you, now and hereafter. Go.
I was soon dressed, and when I heard Mr. Rochester quit Mrs. Fairfax's parlour, I hurried down to it.
The old lady had been reading her morning portion of scripture, the lesson for the day. Her Bible lay open before her, and her spectacles were upon it.
Her occupation, suspended by Mr. Rochester's announcement, seemed now forgotten. Her eyes, fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the surprise of a quiet mind stirred by unwanted tidings.
Seeing me, she roused herself. She made a sort of effort to smile, and framed a few words of congratulation, but the smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned and finished.
She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from the table.
I feel so astonished, she began. I hardly know what to say to you, Miss Eyre. I've surely not been dreaming, have I?
Sometimes I half fall asleep when I'm sitting alone, and fancy things that have never happened.
It has seemed to me, more than once when I've been in a doze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since, has come in and sat down beside me, and that I have even heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do.
Now, can you tell me whether it's actually true that Mr. Rochester has asked you to marry him?
Don't laugh at me, but I really thought he came in here five minutes ago, and said that in a month you would be his wife.
He has said the same thing to me, I replied.
He has? Do you believe him? Have you accepted him?
Yes.
She looked at me bewildered.
I could never have thought it.
He is a proud man. All the Rochester's were proud, and his father at least liked money. He, too, has always been called careful.
He means to marry you? He tells me so.
She surveyed my whole person. In her eyes, I read that they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.
It passes me, she continued, but no doubt it is true since you say so. How it will answer I cannot tell. I really don't know.
The quality of position and fortune is often advisable in such cases, and there are twenty years of differences in your ages.
He might almost be your father.
No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax, exclaimed I, needled. He is nothing like my father.
No one who saw us together would suppose it for an instant. Mr. Rochester looks as young, and is as young, as some men of five and twenty.
Is it really for love who is going to marry you? she asked.
I was so hurt by the coldness in her scepticism that the tears rose to my eyes.
I am sorry to grieve you, pursued the widow, but you are so young and so little acquainted with men. I wish to put you on your guard.
It is an old saying that all is not gold with the glitters, and in this case I do fear there will be something found to be different to what either you or I expect.
Why, am I a monster? I said. Is it impossible that Mr. Rochester should have a sincere affection for me?
No, you are very well, and much improved of late, and Mr. Rochester, I dare say, is fond of you.
I have always noticed that you were a sort of pet of his.
There are times when, for your sake, I have been a little uneasy at his much preference, and have wished to put you on your guard.
But I did not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong.
I knew such an idea would shock, perhaps offend you, and you were so discreet, and so thoroughly modest and sensible.
I hope you might be trusted to protect yourself.
Last night I cannot tell you what I suffered when I saw it all over the house, and could find you nowhere, nor the master either, and then at twelve o'clock, so you come in with him.
Well, never mind that now, I interrupted impatiently. It is enough that all was right.
I hope all will be right in the end, she said, but believe me, you cannot be too careful.
Try and keep Mr. Rochester at a distance. Distrust yourself as well as him.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry their governesses.
I was growing truly irritated. Happily Adele ran in.
Let me go! Let me go to Melkote too, she cried. Mr. Rochester won't, though there is so much room in the new carriage. Beg him to let me go, Mademoiselle.
That I will, Adele, and I hastened away with her, glad to quit my gloomy monitress.
The carriage was ready, they were bringing it round to the front, and my master was on the pavement, pilot following him backwards and forwards.
Adele may accompany us, may she not, sir?
I told her no, I'll have no brats, I'll have only you.
Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please, it would be better.
Not it, she will be a restraint.
He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
The chill of Mrs. Fairfax's warnings and the damp of her doubts were upon me.
Something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty beset my hopes. I have lost a sense of power over him.
I was about, mechanically, to obey him without further remonstrance.
But as he helped me into the carriage he looked at my face.
What is the matter? he asked. All the sunshine is gone.
Do you really wish the band to go? Will it annoy you if she is left behind?
I would rather she went, sir.
Then off with your bonnet and back like a flash of lightning, cried he to Adele.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
After all, a single morning's interruption will not matter much, said he, when I mean shortly to claim you, your thoughts, conversation and company for life.
Adele, when lifted in, commenced kissing me by way of expressing her gratitude for my intercession.
She was instantly stirred away into a corner of the other side of him.
She then peered around to where I sat, so Stone, a neighbour, was too restrictive to him in his present fractious mood.
She dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
Let her come to me, I entreated. She will perhaps trouble you, sir. There's plenty of room on this side.
He handed her over as if she had been a lap-dog.
I'll send her to school yet, he said, but now he was smiling.
Adele heard him and asked if she was to go to school, San Mademoiselle.
Yes, he replied, absolutely, San Mademoiselle, for I am to take Mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano tops, and Mademoiselles shall live with me there and only me.
She'll have nothing to eat. You will starve her, observed Adele.
I shall gather manna for her morning and night. The plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna, Adele.
She'll want to warm herself. What will she do for her fire?
Fire rises out of the lunar mountains. When she's cold, I'll carry her up to a peak and lay her down on the edge of a crater.
Qu'elle sera mal, pour comfortable, and her clothes they will wear out. How can she get new ones?
Mr. Rochester professed to be puzzled.
Hmm, said he. What would you do, Adele?
Could all your brains for an expedient? How would a white or pink cloud answer for a gown, do you think? And could one cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow?
She's far better than she is, concluded Adele, after musing some time.
Besides, if you would get tired of living with only you in the moon, if I were Mademoiselle, I would never consent to go with you.
She has consented. She has pledged her word.
But you can't get her there. There's no road to the moon. It is all air, and neither you nor she can fly.
Adele, look at that field. We were now outside Thornfield Gate, and barrelling lightly along the smooth road to Millcote,
where the dust was well laid by the thunderstorm, and where the low hedges and lofty timber trees on each side glistened green and rain-refreshed.
In that field, Adele, I was walking late one evening about a fortnight since, the evening of the day you helped me to make hay in the orchard meadows.
And as I was tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest me on a stire, and there I took out a little book and a pencil,
and began to write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a wish I had for happy days to come.
I was writing away very fast, though daylight was fading from the leaf, when something came up the path and stopped two yards off me.
I looked at it. It was a little thing with a veil of gossam on its head. I beckoned it to come near me.
It stood soon at my knee. I never spoke to it, and it never spoke to me in words.
But I read its eyes, and it read mine, and our speechless colloquy was to this effect.
It was a fairy, and come from Elfland, it said, and its errand was to make me happy.
I must go with it out of the common world to a lonely place, such as the moon, for instance.
And it nodded its head towards her horn, rising over Hayhill.
It told me of the alabaster cave and silver vale where we might live.
I said I should like to go, but reminded it, as you did me, that I had no wings to fly.
Oh, returned the fairy, that does not signify.
Here is a talisman that will remove all the difficulties.
And she held out a pretty gold ring.
Put it, she said, of the fourth finger of my left hand, and I am yours and your mine,
and we shall leave earth and make our heaven yonder.
She nodded again at the moon.
The ring ideal is in my breecher's pocket, under the disguise of a sovereign.
But I mean soon to change it to a ring again.
But what has Mademoiselle to do with that?
I don't care for the fairy.
You said it was Mademoiselle you would take to the moon.
Mademoiselle is a fairy, he said, whispering mysteriously.
Whereupon I told her not to mind his pain, and she, on her part,
invents the fund of genuine French skepticism, denominating Mr. Rochester,
un rare mentor, and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his con de fille,
and that de reste il y en avait partie fille et quand même il y en avait.
She was sure they would never appear to him, nor ever give him rings,
or offer to live with him in the moon.
The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me.
Mr. Rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk warehouse.
There I was ordered to choose half a dozen dresses.
I hated the business.
I begged Lee to defer it.
No, it should be gone through with now.
By dint of entreaties expressed in energetic whispers,
I reduced the half-dozen to two.
These, however, he vowed he would select himself.
With anxiety I watched as I rove over the gay stores.
He would fixed on a rich silk with the most brilliant amethyst dye,
and a superb pink satin.
I told him, in a new series of whispers,
that he might as well buy me a gold gown and a silver bonnet at once.
I should certainly never venture to wear his choice.
With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone,
I persuaded him to make an exchange in favour of a silver-black satin
and pearl-grey silk.
It might pass for the present, he said,
but he would yet see me glittering like a parterre.
Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse,
and then out of a jeweller's shop.
The more he bought me, the more my cheek burned
with a sense of annoyance and degradation.
As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back feverish, in fact,
I remembered what, in the hurry of events, dark and bright,
I had wholly forgotten.
The letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed.
His intention to adopt me make me his legatee.
It would indeed be a relief, I thought,
if I had ever so small an independency.
I never came bare being dressed like a doll by Mr. Rochester
or sitting like a second Darnay
with a golden shower falling daily round me.
I write to Madeira the moment I get home,
and tell my uncle John I am going to be married and to whom.
If I had but a prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester
an accession of fortune,
I could better endure to be kept by him now.
And somewhat relieved by this idea,
which I failed not to execute that day,
I ventured once more to meet my master's and lover's eye,
which most pertinently sought mine,
though I averted both face and gaze.
He smiled, and I thought his smile was such as a salt and mite
in a blissful and fond moment,
bestow on a slave his golden gems had enriched.
I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously,
and thrust it back to him red with a passionate pressure.
You need not look in that way, I said.
If you do, I'll wear nothing but my own low-wood frocks
to the end of the chapter.
I'll be married in this lilac gingham.
You may make a dressing-gown for yourself out of pearly grey silk
and an infinite series of waistcoats out of the black satin.
He chuckled. He rubbed his hands.
Oh, is it rich to see and hear her?
He exclaimed. Is she original? Is she pecaned?
I would not exchange this one little English girl
for the Grand Turk's whole seracchio,
gazellide, hoary forms, and all.
The eastern illusion put me again.
I'll not stand you an inch of this dead in a seracchio, I said,
so don't consider me an equivalent for one.
If you ever fancy for anything in that line,
away with you, sir, to the bazaars of Stamboul without delay,
and lay out in extensive slave purchases
some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satisfactory here.
And what will you do, Janet,
while I am bargaining for so many tons of flesh
and such an assortment of black eyes?
I'll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary
to preach liberty to them that I enslaved,
your harem inmates among the rest.
I'll get admitted there, and I'll stir up mutiny,
and you, three-tailed beshaw, as you are, sir,
shall in a thrice find yourself fettered amongst our hands.
Nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds
till you have signed a charter,
the most liberal that this pot has ever yet conferred.
I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane.
I would have no mercy, Mr. Rochester,
if you supplicated for it with an eye like that,
but while you looked so, I should be certain
that whatever charter you might grant under curshion,
your first act, when released, would be to violate its conditions.
Why, Jane, what would you have?
I fear you will compel me to go through a private marriage ceremony
besides that performed at the altar.
You will stipulate, I see, for peculiar terms.
What will they be?
I only want an easy mind, sir,
not crushed by crowded obligations.
Do you remember what you said of Céline Varence?
Of the diamonds the cashmere you gave her?
I will not be your English, Céline Varence.
I shall continue to act as a deals governess.
By that I shall earn my board and lodgings,
and thirty pounds a year besides.
I'll furnish my own wardrobe out of that money,
and you shall give me nothing but...
Well, but what?
Your regard, and if I give you mine in return,
that debt will be quit.
Well, for cool native impotence,
and pure innate pride you haven't your equal, said he.
We were now approaching Thornfield.
Will it please you to dine with me today?
he asked as we re-entered the gates.
No, thank you, sir.
And what for? No thank you, if one may inquire.
I never have dined with you, sir,
and I see no reason why I should now, till...
Till what? You delight in half-phrases.
So I can't help it.
Do you suppose I eat like an ogre or a gowl,
that you dread being the companion of my repast?
I have formed no superstition of the subject, sir,
but I want to go on as usual for another month.
You will give up your governessing slavery at once.
Indeed, begging your pardon, sir, I shall not.
I shall just go on with it as usual.
I shall keep out of your way all day,
as I have been accustomed to do.
You may sing for me in the evening,
when you feel disposed to see me,
and I'll come then, but at no other time.
I want a smoke, Janet,
or a pinch of snuff to comfort me and all this.
Poor me donna own continence, as a deal would say.
And unfortunately I have neither my cigar-case nor my snuff-box.
But listen, whisper,
it is your time now, little tyrant,
but it will be mine presently,
and when I have fairly seized you to heaven to hold,
I'll just, figuratively speaking,
attach you to a chain like this,
touching his watch-guard.
Yes, bunny-wee thing,
I'll wear you in my bosom lest a jewelish time.
He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage,
and while he afterwards lifted out a deal,
I entered the house and made good my retreat upstairs.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I'd prepared an occupation for him,
for I was determined not to spend the whole time
in that city at stake conversation.
I remembered his fine voice,
and knew he liked to sing.
Good singers generally do.
I was no vocalist myself,
and in his fastidious judgment,
no musician either.
But I delighted in listening when the performance was good.
No sooner had twilight that our romance
began to lower her blue and starry banner over the letters,
that I rose,
opened the piano,
and entreated him for the love of heaven to give me a song.
He said I was a capricious witch,
and that he would rather sing another time,
but I averred that no time was like the present.
Did I like his voice?
He asked.
Very much.
I was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity of his,
but for once, and for motives of expediency,
I would ensueth and stimulate it.
Vain Janet, you must play the accompaniment.
Very well, sir. I will try.
I did try,
but was presently swept off the stool
and denominated a little bungler,
being pushed unceremoniously to one side,
which was precisely what I wanted.
He usurped my place,
and proceeded to accompany himself,
for he could play as well as sing.
I heed me to the winter recess,
and while I sat then,
looked out at the misty trees and dim lawn.
Two sweet airs were sung in mellow tones
the following strain.
The truest love the devil heart
felt at its kindlet's core
did throw each vein in quickened start
the tide of being poor.
Her coming was my hope each day,
her parting was my pain.
The chance that did her steps delay
was ice in every vein.
I dreamed it would be nameless bliss,
as I loved left to be,
and to this object did I press
as blind as eagerly.
But wide as pathless was the space
that lay our lives between,
and dangerous as the foamy race
of ocean surges green,
and haunted as a rubber path
through wilderness or wood,
for might and right,
and woe and wrath,
between our spirits stood.
I dangerous dared,
I hindered and scorned,
I omens did defy.
Whatever menaced, harassed, warned,
I passed impetuous by.
On sped my rainbow
fast as light,
I flew as in a dream,
for glorious rose upon my sight
the child of shower and gleam.
Still bright the clouds of suffering dim,
shines that soft, solemn joy,
nor care I now how dense and grim
disaster's gathered eye.
I care not in this moment sweet,
though all I have rushed o'er,
should come in pinion strong and fleet,
proclaiming vengeance sore.
Though haughty hate should strike me down,
bright bar approached to me,
and grinding might with furious frown,
swear endless enmity.
My love has placed a little hand,
with noble faith in mine,
and vowed that wedlock's sacred band
our nature shall entwine.
My love has sworn with seal and kiss,
with me to live, to die.
I have at last my nameless bliss,
as I love, loved am I.
He rose and came towards me,
and I saw his face all kindled,
with his full falcon eye flashing,
and tenderness and passion in every alignment.
I qualled momentarily.
Then I rallied.
Soft scene, daring demonstration I would not have,
and I stood in peril of both.
A weapon of defence must be prepared.
I wetted my tongue.
As he reached me, I asked with asperity,
Whom he was going to marry now?
That was a strange question
to be put by his darling Jane.
Indeed, I considered it
a very natural and necessary one.
He had talked of his future wife dying with him.
What did he mean by such a pagan idea?
I had no intention of dying with him.
He might depend on that.
Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for,
was that I might live with him.
Death was not for such as I.
Indeed it was.
I had as good a right to die
when my time came as he had,
but I should bide that time
and not be hurried away in a city.
Would I forgive him for the selfish idea
and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss?
No, I would rather be excused.
Here I heard myself
apostrophised as a hard little thing,
and it was added.
Any other woman would have been melted to marrow
at hearing such stances crooned in her praise.
I assured him I was naturally hard,
very flinty,
and that he would often find me so,
and that, moreover,
I was determined to show him diverse record points
in my character before the ensuring
four weeks elapsed.
He should know full of what sort of bargain
he had made while there was yet time
to rescind it.
Would I be quiet and talk rationally?
I would be quiet if he liked,
and as to talking rationally,
I flattered myself I was doing that now.
He fretted, pitched, and shored.
Very good, I thought.
You may fume and fidget as you please,
but this is the best plan to pursue with you,
I'm certain.
I like you more than I can say,
but I will not sink into baths of sentiment,
and with this needle of riparty
I'll keep you from the edge of a gulf too,
and, moreover,
maintained by its pungent aid,
let distance between you and myself
be most conductive to a real mutual advantage.
From less to more,
I woked him up to considerable irritation.
Then, after he had retired in Dajian,
quite to the other end of the room,
I got up and saying,
I wish you good night, sir,
in my natural and wanted respectful manner.
I stepped out by the side door and got away.
This system thus entered on,
I pursued during the whole season
of probation,
and with the best success.
He was kept, to be sure,
rather crass and crusty,
but on the whole I could see he was
accidentally entertained,
and that a lameplike submission
and turtledove sensibility,
while thus during his despotism
more would have pleased his judgment,
satisfied his common sense,
and even suited his tasteless.
In other people's presence
I was, as formerly,
differential and quiet,
any other line of conduct being uncalled for.
It was only in the evening
conferences I thus
thwarted and afflicted him.
He continued to send for me punctually
the moment the clock struck seven,
though when I appeared before him now
he had no such honeying terms as
love and darling on his lips.
The best words at my service were
provoking puppet,
malicious elf,
sprite, changeling, etc.
For caresses, too,
I now got grimaces,
for a pressure of the hand, a pinch in the arm,
for a kiss on the cheek
as the weird tweak of the ear.
It was all right.
At present I decidedly preferred these fierce
favors to anything more tender.
Mrs. Fairfax, I saw,
approved me. Her anxiety on my
account vanished. Therefore I was
certain I did well.
Meantime Mr. Rochester affirmed that I was
wearing him to skin and bone and threatened
awful vengeance for my present
conduct at some period fast coming.
I laughed in my sleeve at his
menaces.
I can keep you in a reasonable check now,
I reflected, and I don't doubt to be able to
do it hereafter. If one expedient
loses its virtue, another must be
devised.
Yet, after all, my task was not an easy
one. Often I would rather
have pleased than tease him.
My future husband was becoming to me
my whole world, and more than the
world, almost my hope of heaven.
He stood between me and
every thought of religion as
an eclipse intervenes between man and the
broad sun. I could not in
those days seek God for His
creature, of whom I had made an
idol.